# maintain_ice_links.py

This document is draft technical documentation for `maintain_ice_links.py`. The purpose of the script
is to scan linked EDD and ICE instances for inconsistencies,  then to update ICE's experiment 
links to reference the EDD studies that the strains are used in.  From within JBEI's network, 
see [SYNBIO-1190](https://support.jbei.org/browse/SYNBIO-1190) for a more detailed discussion.


## Remaining work before use

At the time of writing, this script is close, but not yet ready for production use.  Further work on
it has been deferred in favor of higher priority work, especially because as it nears completion and
remaining bugs become less apparent, each round of testing takes ~3 hours to complete (largely unsupervised).

Transferring notes on remaining known work on the script into this file so they're accessible to
anyone with access to the script. Recent tests indicate that at a minimum, the following should be
done before using this script on the production databases:

* __Retest legacy Perl URL pattern matching__ legacy Perl-style EDD URLs no longer appear to be 
   detected by the script according to a test on 8/24/17 against edd-test.jbei.org
* __Resolve REST API strain resource intent__ this script was initally coded to depend on 
  `/rest/strains/` and `/rest/strains/studies/` API resources, which more recently are under 
  debate, and have been temporarily disabled in EDD's initial REST API
* __Add a user prompt to confirm target URL’s___ as in more recent work on `create_lines.py`. 
  There's currently no confirmation
  of the targeted deployment URL's captured in configuration files, and developers may change these 
  for other purposes (e.g. for running `create_lines.py`). This is especially dangerous if the script
  has gone unused for a while, and has new maintenance-generated bugs that can potentially cause
  problems in production if used there by accident.
* __Confirm URL updates are correct__
  One of the most recent commits to this branch was a tentative correction to the URLs it generates
  for EDD studies (see EddApi).  The change was made only in the context of a single EDDApi method
  to correct an extra '/', but should may also result in a similar addition to `maintain_ice_links`
  so it correctly handles its parameter related to `alternate_base_url`, if used elsewhere in the script.
  See the [relevant commit](https://repo.jbei.org/projects/EDD/repos/edd-django/commits/f4c1b36850d14b981c1cb6dd24932b4e9c63d3eb#jbei/rest/clients/edd/api.py)
* __Resolve dry run / actual run differences in detected__
   * of up-to-date links changes -- appears that since earlier tests, something has changed that
     broke the `-dry run` feature and caused it to start actually updating links in ICE. Despite 
	 warnings in the code and documentation, it's dangerous to leave this feature broken, and fixing
	 it may reveal other problems in the immature API / this script
* __Re-confirm summary statistics__: with the exception of known issues listed above, current statistics
   generated by the script are thought to be correct, and were carefully spot checked in earlier development.
   Database contents have changed since that time, and the supporting EDD REST client code has also
   changed a lot (and much of it is only used here at present).  It's worth re-confirming this stuff,
   particularly since initial tests of statitics revealed bugs that would otherwise have gone undetected.
* __Re-run tests against test EDD/ICE instances__ (see suggested example testing process below).
  Due to the intermediate state of development of both EDD and ICE during initial work on 
  `maintain_ice_links.py`, most of the initial testing was done against `edd-test` and `ice-test`, 
  which are more divergent than the production deployments, and therefore more useful for 
  identifying problems that should be resolved by `maintain_ice-links.py`, and for testing its 
  features (some of which are needed, but don't yet occur in the production databases).
* __Clarify / fix `-update_strain_text`__: need to brush up memory of how EDD strains are named 
   (e.g. if ICE strain has an alias). This feature isn't scrictly required for an initial run to
   add in the hundreds of missing links from ICE to EDD noted during recent tests.  Can potentially 
   be revisited later.
* __Clarify summary output re: ICE scan__ on first look following a successful scan, it appears that
  some strains were skipped. In fact, an optimization was used to avoid reprocessing strains that
  were used in EDD.
* __Update URL pattern matching__ recent updates to EDD have added slug-based URLs as the default, 
  and the script has not yet been updated to detect those URLs.  Instead, the new URLs are treated
  as external references, which is incorrect.


## Running the Script

__Options__: there are many, mostly for helping to test the script in various environments or in 
different stages of development.  It's best to just run 
`python -m jbei.edd.rest.scripts.maintain_ice_links` and read the help.  

__Runtime__:
The script's runtime is heavily dependent on the amount of data in the EDD/ICE databases, as well as 
the speed of connections to them. As of 10/12/16, test runs on a development laptop take about an 
hour each, though little effort has gone into optimizing the runtime on this script. It shouldn't 
have to run often, and should run mostly unsupervised, so it's probably not worth the effort to 
optimize.

## Limitations

1. The `-update_strain_text` option hasn't been fully tested at present. See EDD-XXX and ICE-XXX. 
Probably need some additional input on whether / how to go about this (alias?)
2. Not optimized. First pass at this script is just to get it working, and unclear whether 
optimization work will be worth the additional development time / complexity.

## Maintenance Concerns
The scripts `-dry_run` option is an important feature for speeding up the testing process for large 
changes to the script or related REST API's.  However, it depends on wrapper classes that descend 
from IceApi and EddApi. If you alter the script to use different methods of those Api's, it's 
important to change the method overrides as well so you don't accidentally make database changes.  
There's a reminder prompt when you run the script, but it's easy to get in the habit of cutting-and-
pasting commands that have the `-no_warn` option already set to hide the prompt.  Use it carefully!! 
his option was used heavily during initial testing of the script, but is purposefully removed from 
examples below.

## Testing process for maintain_ice_links.py

See below for sample instructions for testing maintain_ice_links.py against local 
deployments of EDD and ICE.  This is a general outline for the initial testing performed 
before running this script on the production versions of EDD and ICE for the first time. It's 
probably not optimized in every case, though it should give helpful hints on important steps / 
problems encountered during some variants of the testing process. Note that testing commands below 
work, but behave a bit strangely with regard to user input when piped to `tee`. You might want to 
run a few times without `tee` to figure out what's being asked for during the login process.

### Be on the wired JBEI network
With current LBNL IT policy and EDD software, you won't be able to directly connect to 
postgres.jbei.org or to login on your local EDD instance unless you're connected to the wired 
network.

### Create reference database dumps so tests are repeatable
This may seem like overkill, but it's very helpful to make results comparable across multiple runs 
while squashing bugs.

### Dump the ICE test database:

* Create the dump: 

  `pg_dump -Fp -C -E UTF8 -h postgres.jbei.org -U mark.forrer -d test_regdb -f ice_test_dump.sql`
* Replace user/database names to `ice_local_test` / `reguser` to avoid having to change local ICE 
  config

### Dump the ICE prod database:

* Create the dump

  `pg_dump -Fp -C -E UTF8 -h postgres.jbei.org -U mark.forrer -d regdb -f ice_prod_dump.sql`

* Replace database name to `ice_local_test`

### Dump the EDD prod database:

* Create the dump

  `pg_dump -Fp -C -E UTF8 -h postgres.jbei.org -U mark.forrer -d eddprod -f edd_prod_dump.sql`

* Replace database name 'eddprod' with 'edd'

### Start local EDD / ICE
If EDD/ICE are newly installed in the test environment, look below at "Set Predictable State".
* EDD

      cd edd
      docker-compose up -d	
* Start ICE

      cd ../ice
      mvn:jetty run
	
### Confirm admin access to ICE / EDD
* Log in via the web interfaces to confirm your account has admin access
   * EDD will have an 'Administration' link at top right if your account has administrator or some 
   accellerated privileges. The script doesn't currently have fine-grained checks for this, so it 
   may fail later (though it will be relatively early in the process)
* ICE: `update accounts set type = 'ADMIN' where email = 'mark.forrer@lbl.gov';`
* EDD

      user = User.objects.get(username='mark.forrer')
      user.is_superuser = True
      user.save()

### Set Predictable Database State
Use the included reset_docker_databases.sh script to simplify repeated database restores to a known
state.  You'll have to copy and edit reset_docker_database.conf-example to match your local 
configuration, then run the script to drop and restore both EDD and ICE databases.
	
	
### Configure which target deployments are searched/modified by the script

Edit jbei.edd.rest.scripts.local_settings.py to set target deployments, for example, for local 
EDD/ICE instances:

    LOCAL_DOCKER_EDD_URL = 'https://192.168.99.100:443'
    DOCKER_CONTAINER_INTERNAL_URL = 'https://localhost:8000'
    EDD_URL = LOCAL_DOCKER_EDD_URL
    VERIFY_EDD_CERT = False
    
    LOCAL_ICE_URL = 'https://localhost:8443'
    ICE_TEST_URL = 'http://registry-test.jbei.org:8443'
    ICE_URL = LOCAL_ICE_URL
    VERIFY_ICE_CERT = False
    
    DEFAULT_LOCALE = b'en_US.UTF-8'  # override Docker container default to work in OSX
	
### Run the script (dry run)
Doing a dry run first helps to quickly identify configuration / software syntax errors without 
polluting the test databases with partial changes. If making significant changes to the script, or 
following significant changes to EDD / ICE, consider using the `-test_edd_strain_limit` option to 
test progressively larger numbers of EDD strains. Also consider using command line options to test a 
single EDD strain / ICE entry, or initially omitting the `-scan_ice_entries` option to focus just on 
the faster/most useful portion of the script that only examines strains found in EDD's database. 
Always save the script's output to file, since it takes around an hour for each full run on a 
development laptop.

You can help to test the `-dry-run` option by commenting out the lines that set the `write_enabled` 
property for the EDD/ICE client side API instances created just following the initial user login. 
The base level API code should raise Exceptions if any real mutator methods accidentally get called 
(e.g. because of easy-to-miss maintenance oversights)

    python -m jbei.edd.rest.scripts.maintain_ice_links -username mark.forrer \
           -dry_run -scan_ice_entries -test_edd_url https://edd.jbei.org/ 2>&1 | tee 1-dry-run.txt

### Run the script (actual run)
Do a full run of the script, and consider using a combination of grep / summary stastics computed by 
the script to identify logic errors.  Also consider checking for unexpected differences in summary 
results from the dry run mode (which is a bit brittle) Comparisons of this type nearly always turn 
up bugs that would otherwise go undetected.

    python -m jbei.edd.rest.scripts.maintain_ice_links -username mark.forrer -scan_ice_entries \
           -test_edd_url https://edd.jbei.org/ 2>&1 | tee 2-first-run.txt
	
### Re-Run the script
Do a second full run of the script to make sure all of the changes attempted by the first run 
actually stuck. A lot of effort went into writing the consistency checks that cause the script to
update ICE's links. Use them to help.

    python -m jbei.edd.rest.scripts.maintain_ice_links -username mark.forrer -scan_ice_entries \
          -test_edd_url https://edd.jbei.org/ 2>&1 | tee 3-second-run.txt
	
### Consider repeating tests on test databases
As used presently at JBEI, the EDD/ICE test database contents have diverged significantly from 
production as a result of testing use.  The differences are a significant advantage in this case, 
since they exercise the script more fully by exhibiting more inconsistencies han the EDD/ICE 
production databases. As a result, they're better stress tests of the script. Dump files are saved 
to Google Drive that capture the state of these databases before the script was run to correct them.
